# Creole Studies

.ve-map 17.50,-88.19 10 width=70% right
    - 17.50,-88.19 "Belize" "The Creole language situation in Belize is very different than that of Creole languages in the other countries. As the official language of Belize, English is the prestige language in contrast to other Central American nations where Spanish is the official language. Although Kriol holds high covert prestige (domains of use include music, plays, stories, poems, and to a limited extent, media), it holds low overt prestige (deemed inappropriate for use in education/government) (Escure, 2013; Fuller Medina, 2020). Kriol is not listed in UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger (Moseley, 2010); this makes sense as even in the multilingual environment of modern Belize, Kriol influences other languages (e.g. Spanish) much more than it itself is influenced, which is also unique for Creole languages (Fuller Medina, 2020)."



The earliest records of a Creole language developing in Central America begin around 1640, with the first contact between enslaved Africans and the Indigenous Miskito people on the coast of Nicaragua. This African group had been forcibly enslaved around 1627 by English Puritan settlers on the island of Old Providence, and were shipwrecked on the Miskito coast while escaping a 1641 Spanish takeover of the island (Bartens, 2009). This meeting, according to Decker and Keener (1998, p. 4), marks the beginning of Miskito Coast Creole. The exact point of Central American Creole genesis is somewhat ambiguous, as there was some contact between English pirates and Miskito people by 1589, and certain 16th century English-origin words in Miskito Coast Creole may be due to this earlier meeting (Holm, 1978). The beginning of Creole development differs between countries, too, though Nicaragua has the earliest continuous English use in Central America, with Guatemala’s 1630s-era English speakers of African descent assimilating into the dominant Hispanophone culture (Montiel, 2002), and other countries only encountering the English later in the century. Ultimately, the exact date of Creole genesis will not always be possible, or necessary, to determine -- as Mufwene (1996, p. 91) points out, most colonies developed gradually, coming into contact with a changing set of languages over multiple generations, and it is likely that these Creole languages experienced equally gradual development. 


